
arrow's impossibility theorem.

an ordinal voting system (ie rank order) cannot satisfy all of these fairness requirements.

1) no dictator.
no single voter can determine the winner.

2) produces a complete group ranking.

3) deterministic.
no coin tosses.

4) independence of irrelevant alternatives.
if A wins, then swapping ABC votes for ACB votes have no effect.

5) monotonicity.
voting for a candidate never harms them.
you should never be able to win by asking your voters to vote for someone else.

6) every group ranking is possible.

7) unanimity - mathematically replaces 5,6.
if everyone ranks A>B then the group ranking must also be A>B.



real world considerations.

1) vote splitting.
2016 republican primary.
trump got 40% of the vote.
the majority was split between cruz, rubio, kasick.
cruz and rubio beat trump head-to-head.
no data on kasick.
in other words, most people would have preferred anyone else.
which is not to be confused with most people would have preferred *someone* else.

2) partisanship.
we assert without proof that when the choice is between two dominant polar extremes
and a minority centrist...
the centrist should win.
because they are most everyone's second choice.

3) strategic voting.
many voters cast their vote for the candidate most likely to defeat their least favorite.


current voting systems:

first past the post.
fails vote splitting.
fails partisanship.
fails strategic voting.
people don't vote for their favorite candidate if they believe that candidate cannot win.


experimental voting systems:

ranked choice voting:
passes vote splitting.
fails partisanship.
fails strategic voting.

approval voting:
passes vote splitting.
passes partisanship for a sufficiently non-partisan electorate.
fails partisanship for a partisan electorate.
ie the centrist will get the fewest approval votes.
mostly passes strategic voting.
there's very little harm in voting for your actual favorite candidate and the candidate
most likely to defeat your least favorite candidates.


proposed solution: reverse rank order voting.

voters rank all of the candidates.
each round, the candidate with the MOST LAST PLACE votes is eliminated.
not to be confused with ranked choice voting.
where each round, the candidate with the LEASE FIRST PLACE votes is eliminated.

passes vote splitting.
passes partisanship.
passes strategic voting when no candidate has a majority of first place votes.
strategic voting comes into play when a candidate has a majority of first place votes
and is simultaneously the least favorite candidate of everyone else.


flaws:

1) it's hard to implement.
the ballot suite can be large.
most voters really don't want to go to the effort of ranking them.

2) it's theoretically possible to win 90% of the first place votes and still lose.
it's extremely unlikely.


modifications:

1a) run an open primary using first-past-the-post.
the top 3+ finishers advance to the general election.
which uses reverse-rank-order-voting.

1b) allow parties to distribute vote templates.

1c) when a voter casts an incomplete rank order...
complete it for them according to first-past-the-post results.
in other words, the voter states they have no opinion on the rank order for a suset
of the candidates.
and they accept the public's preference.

2) modify the rules so a candidate is declared the winner if the get a sufficiently large
majority of the first place votes.
55% feels about right.
that puts them 10% ahead of the next nearest candidate.
which is considered a landslide.
on the other hand...
if the majority number is too high, say 90%, then strategic voting becomes critical.
if the majority number is too low, say 50%, then the public may have higher utility for
the second place candidate.


summary:

1) run an open primary using first-past-the post.
the top 3+ candidates with the most first place votes advance to the general election.
select 3 when a large number of voters really need to be educated about the issues.
and it's really not feasible to have meaningful debates with more than three candidates.
like say president of the united states.
select a larger number for smaller elections.

2) one (maybe two) months later, hold a general election using reverse-rank-order voting.

3) determine the popular rank order.
rank candidates by the number of first place votes.
resolve ties by number of second (third, fourth, etc) place votes.

4) empty and invalid ballots are removed.
an empty ballot is when the voter fails to select any candidates.
an invalid ballot is when the voter ranks all candidates the same.

5) apply the front runner rule.
if a candidate has 55% or more of the first place votes they are declared the winner.
in practice this should never matter.
jurisdictions should be free to set this threshold to make the electorate happy.
we want people to vote.
they won't vote if they think the system is rigged.
the purpose of the rule is to discourage strategic voting.
which may be required when a candidate has a majority of the popular vote.
and becomes more necessary with a large number of candidates.
on the other hand, it's possible the electorate would be better served by the second
place candidate.
we want to allow this to happen.
the art is to find the balance.

NO! 6) undervotes are when a voter only assigns ranks to some of the candidates.
also called an incomplete ballot.
the missing rankings are filled in using the popular rank order.

NO! 7) overvotes are when a voter assigns the same rank to multiple candidates.
the ties are resolved using the popular rank order.

8) each round, the candidate with the most last place votes is eliminated from the ballot.

9) repeat until all but one candidate (the winner) have been eliminated.

NO! note: after 7), every ballot is a complete and valid ranking.
for a manual count, the counters find the last place candidate for every ballot.
[in rounds after the first, counters must look at the last place rank (N), check if that
candidate has been eliminated (should be marked) and continue to higher ranked candidates
if necessary.]
add the ballot to that candidate's pile.
the candidate with the largest pile is eliminated.
that candidate is so marked on every ballot.


NO!
it turns out...
completing ballots by popular vote is a bad idea.
in the burlington 2009 case, it changes the winner from Andy to Bob.
which is bad cause Andy is the condorcet winner.


problem cases:

condorcet cycles.
when is strategic voting relevant?
there are three methods for handling incomplete ballots:
- 1 vote for all N last place candidates.
- 1/N votes when there are N last place candidates.
- use the popular vote ordering.
when does it matter?
what is the manual vote complexity?


experiments to run:

for strategic voting:
vary front-runner lead 51 to 99, popularity of second place, number of candidates.
determine percent of front-runner voters that need to vote strategically.
